We want to use socket.io
and we have to add it on both the server and the client,
so both on the node app here and on the react app because client server will communicate through web sockets,
so we have to establish that communication channel on both ends, on the frontend react and on the backend,
node.
Now let's start on the backend here
and for that, I'll quit my development server here and I will install this socket.io package with npm
install --save socket.io, let me hit enter here and this will install the package into our node
project.
Now how do we use it?
Well let's go to app.js,
so to the first file that runs when we start our server and there, we should set up our socket.io connections
we want to expose. Just as we set up our routes there
in the end, we forward requests to our routes
and you could of course also do the socket.io set up in a different file but I'll do it here
but just as we set up our routes for the normal http requests, we can also set up our socket.io channels
and keep in mind, socket.io uses a different protocol,
web sockets and therefore web socket requests will not interfere with the normal http requests which
are sent by default by the browser.
So how do we set up socket.io here?
Well once we connect to our database, when we start up our server, there I also want to establish or I
want to set up my socket.io connection.
I'll create a new constant, io and I will require the socket.io package here. This package or the thing
we are exporting here actually exposes a function which requires our created server as an argument.
Now the listen method here does actually return us a new node server, so we can store that in a constant,
this is the node server we spun up,
it's stored here.
We have to pass that to a function returned by require socket.io,
so we add parentheses here to execute that function that is returned by socket.io and we pass the server
to it.
This sets up socket.io
and I mentioned that web sockets build up on http,
now since this server here uses http, we used that http server to establish our web socket connection that
uses that http protocol as a basis you could say.
Now this gives us an io, a socket.io object which does set up all the web socket stuff behind the scenes
for us and which we now can use.
Now we can use it to define a couple of event listeners for example, for example to wait for new connections,
so whenever a new client connects to us.
So then we execute a certain function where we get the client, the so-called socket that did connect as an
argument or the connection as an argument to be precise,
so this is the connection between our server and the client which connected and this function will be
executed for every new client that connects,
so not only one time but as often as required, as many clients as connect.
So here I will print client connected
and right now if I run npm start, we'll never see client connected in the console,
we don't see it here because we established all that on the server side,
we now got a waiting socket connection or port
you could say but we got no client which would connect and that of course is the next step we have to
do.